Okay, so Google just released an update
to Gemini Deep Think. Now it's powered
by Gemini 3. And everybody's kind of
losing their minds on benchmark numbers.
84% on RKGI 2, gold medals on math,
physics, chemistry, Olympiad, and
legendary Grandmaster on Code Force.
Now, these are impressive, but if that's
all you take away from this release,
you're missing the actual story here.
Google actually did three things all at
once and most people are conflating all
of them into one announcement. So there
is a product update of deep think
version 2 shipping to subscribers. Then
there is a research agent called Eliteia
that nobody is really talking about but
it's very critical and there are two
archive papers documenting 18 solved
research problems. So the distance
between what was shipped to the
consumers and what is happening in the
research lab is the real story here. So
let me try to break it down. Now first
let's get the benchmarks out of the way
because that's what most people are
talking about. For humanity's last exam
who is seeing 48.4%.
This is a benchmark specifically
designed to test the absolute limits of
frontier models when it comes to human
knowledge. Then there is ARC AGI2. Now
here it's able to get 84.6% which is 15
points ahead of Cloud Opus 46 and over
30 points ahead of GPT52
which is kind of crazy. I don't think we
were expecting this. And then there is
code forces. So, it gets an ELO score of
3455, which is pretty incredible because
this puts Gemini 3 Deep Think at the
eighth best computer programmer position
in the world right now, which is a very
incredible feat to say the least. Now,
there is a lot of discussion about the
actual effectiveness of Gemini 3 as a
programmer compared to some of the other
models. We're going to talk about that
later in the video. Now let's
specifically talk about this Arc Asia 2
score because this is probably one of
the most important result for deep
think. So first the cost story deep
things cost about 13.62
per task. That's actually 82% cheaper
than the earlier deep think versions.
Now, this matters because a company
called Poetic built an agentic harness
on top of regular Gemini 3 Pro that hit
54% on RKGI 2 at $31 per task, which was
way less than $77 per task of earlier
version of Deep Think. So, these systems
are becoming extremely smart at a
reasonable efficiency now. So, that
tells you something about what Deep
Think actually is. Now one thing to uh
consider some of the benchmarks that
Google reported for Gemini 3 deep think
uses tools on compared to tools off with
some of the other providers. But before
that let's talk about what deep think
technically is. And this is important
because a lot of people think it's a
separate model. It's not. Deepthink is a
reasoning mode within Gemini 3. It is
the same base model but it allocates
additional compute at inference time. So
instead of giving you the fastest
possible answer it thinks longer before
responding. Now to understand this this
here is a very high level overview.
Standard chain of thought is linear. So
step one, step two, step three and the
model is done. Now in case of deep think
it does something different. So,
Deepthink does something significantly
different. It explores multiple
hypotheses in parallel, tests each one
of them, refine the best, verifies it,
and then gives you the answer. And more
critically, it can backtrack. So, let's
say if you go down hypothesis one and
hits a dead end, it can reverse course.
Standard chain of thought cannot do
that. More importantly, the number of
reasoning rounds is also dynamic. So a
simple question might get two to three
rounds and a complex physics problem
might get 10 rounds or more. Now here is
the real number that matters the most.
The January 2026 version of deep think
reduced the compute required for Olympia
level performance by 100x compared to
the July 2025 version. And they showed
that the infant's time scaling loss
continues to even beyond Olympiate
problems into PhD level exercises. Don't
need bigger models. You need smarter
allocation of compute at inference time.
Let the model think longer. Let it
explore more paths along the way and
backtrack when it needs and you get
dramatically better results without
touching the weights. Now alongside the
product update, Deep Mind published a
paper introducing Althium which I think
is the most interesting update and
nobody's talking about this. So this is
a research agent built on top of deep
thing and it tells you where exactly the
technology is heading. The Althia agent
works as a three-part loop generator,
verifier and reviser. First verifier
takes a research task or problem and
proposes a candidate solution. Then the
verifier which is a separate natural
language mechanism checks the solution
for flaws. We're not talking about just
looking at does this look right but
actually probing the logic for gaps and
hallucination. And then the last step of
this whole architecture is the revisor
which basically patches minor issues or
if the solution is critically flawed, it
triggers a complete restart back to the
generator. Now there are two things that
I've personally found very interesting.
So first, Althia uses Google search in
web browsing to navigate real
mathematical literature. And this is
huge because uh foundation models
hallucinate citations constantly in
specialized domains. In this case,
Althia is grounding its citation to a
specific reference. Now the second one
is that it can admit where it cannot
when it cannot solve a problem. And this
is huge because LLMs by design are very
confident and they will hallucinate
results or it's going to make up stuff.
But they specifically trained this agent
to admit when it cannot solve a problem.
Now the question is what did Althia
actually achieved? We're looking at
91.9%
on advanced proof bench. The previous
record was uh 65.7%.
And this is not just incremental
improvement. Now here's the most
interesting bit. On the 29 out of 30
problems where Althia actually returned
a solution, its conditional accuracy was
98.3%.
But here is the results that matters the
most. Althia outperformed standard deep
thinking
compute scale they tested. So you're
talking about the agent wrapper with
this generate verify revise loop is
going to be more important than throwing
just raw compute at the base model which
is significant. That means that the
harness around the model itself is going
to be more important than just trying to
increase the test time compute. Now we
see this pattern everywhere. So poetex
beats raw deep think on RKGI2 that was
the previous best cloud code with tools
performs better than the base OPUS or uh
aet models. So I think the meta lesson
of this year is going to be very clear.
The agent layer is where the real
capability gains come from not just the
base model itself. to this point.
There's a very interesting blog post
from Ken Bulock where he showed that
just by changing the tool the models
have access to. You can easily get 5 to
8% performance improvement on the model
itself which usually is not possible
with even the update to a next
generation model which is kind of a very
interesting point. I will probably cover
that in another video. Now with Althium
and deep think Gemini 3 they also
released two different interesting
papers. The first one was towards
autonomous mathematics research and the
second one is accelerating scientific
research with Gemini case studies and
common techniques. In this they
collaborated with domain experts on 18
research problems. We're not talking
about just benchmark problems uh because
I think everybody talks about
benchmaxing but these are real open
research questions that humans has been
stuck on and they show that aentic
systems based on Gemini 3 can actually
help solve some of these research
questions
which is fascinating because now we're
going to be able to do research with the
help of these agentic systems. So let me
talk about three interesting ones. There
are a total of 18 uh they are documented
within this blog post and in the paper
if you are interested. Now the first one
was that it was able to dis a decade old
conjecture. In the second example it
crossed mathematical boundaries by
pulling tools from an entirely unrelated
branch of mathematics to solve a problem
that was unsolved. And in third case it
caught a critical error in cryptography.
Well, none of them are my domain
expertise, so I'm not going to even
pretend that I know anything about them,
but they are in the blog post, which
I'll highly recommend to read if you're
interested. Okay, so before somebody
starts making a video claiming that AI
has solved mathematics, I actually want
to highlight something very important
that unfortunately gets ignored in the
headlines that we see. So in here they
say that the results of this paper
should not be interpreted as suggesting
that AI can consistently solve research
level mathematic questions. And this is
very important because previously some
of the frontier labs have made claims
about solving certain problem sets and
they had to take them back. So here is
what exactly Google deep mind is saying.
The first thing is that out of the 700
open problems that are on the ERDOS
problem set they filter it down to 200
AI generated responses which were graded
by humans. Now out of those 200 63 were
technically correct four were
autonomously solved. We are looking at a
success rate of about 6.5%
on research grade problems which might
look small but this is significant
success rate compared to some of the
earlier models that we have seen. Now uh
Deepoint also created a tonomy of u how
they are thinking about solving research
problems with AI. So there are four
different levels for solution proposed
by AI systems. So level zero is uh
reproducing known results and this has
happened with some of the open AI
models. Level one is novel but
incremental. Level two is what they're
calling publishable quality. Level three
is major advances. And level four is
what they're calling landmark
breakthrough. They explicitly stated
that they do not claim any level three
or level four results. Everything they
published is level zero through level
two. And this is refreshingly honest. In
a field where companies routinely claim
breakthroughs and revolution by
incremental improvements, deep mind
said, "We are at a publishable quality.
We are not at a major advance yet."
Now before this release, Google actually
ran a real world experiment. They offer
stock 2026 um conference author a
presubmission feedback generated by an
earlier version of deep think and the
tool reviewed papers for mathematical
correctness identified calculation
errors incorrectly inequities
applications logical gaps in the proofs
and real stuff that makes breaks a paper
which was I think a very interesting
application of this technology and to be
honest this is probably more important
to me than any benchmarks that we are
seeing we are looking at an AI tool that
is already being integrated into paper
reviews at the top academic conferences.
We're not talking about replacing
reviewers but rather helping authors
catch errors before submission. Okay, so
what exactly are the takeaways from this
new release? I think there are three
now. The first one is that inference
time compute scaling works and it's
getting dramatically more efficient. We
talking about 100x reduction in compute
for the same quality in 6 months. So
here we are not talking about bigger
models equal better. Uh I think this is
smarter thinking equals better within
agentic loop which is fundamentally
different scaling paradigm than what we
have been living in the past few years.
Second is going to be uh the importance
of harness and agent being better than
the raw model. If you're building any
agentic systems, the orchestration layer
is going to be the most important one
because this is where I think we're
going to get the most gains other than
retraining the models. And the third is
that we are seeing early glimpse of AI
research collaborators and not just a
coding agent that can generate code for
you, but an AI system that can actually
do research and solve hard problems. Now
these are very early days right as we
saw we're looking at 6.5% success rate
on the hardest problems but still this
is humbling for a system that is
supposed to be just a next token
generator and just like coding system I
think these are going to be early signs
of a junior capable researcher that can
help you with some tasks so really
exciting times and I'm actually excited
for where this goes beyond just the
benchmarks and normal demos that we
create. Now, this is very exciting
stuff. One thing, don't try Gemini 3
deep think on normal oneshot prompts.
This is probably not going to impress
you, but if you have hard technical
problems, I highly recommend to put it
through it and you're going to be
surprised. Anyways, I hope you found
this video useful. Thanks for watching
and as always, see you in the next one.